International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD)
Volume 4 Issue 2, February 2020 Available Online: www.ijtsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 – 6470

Cloud Based Forest Fire Alert System using IoT
Ajith. S1, Chandru. S1, Boopalan. E1, Periyathambi. P2
1Student, 2Associate Professor
1,2Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,

Paavai Engineering College, Namakkal, Tamil Nadu, India
ABSTRACT
The most common hazard in forest fire Accident are themselves destroy the
forest and great threat for wildlife and peoples. The number of trees has
reduced drastically so the forest are creates an unhealthy environment for
animals to survive in the forest. Forest covers 31% of the world and 21% of
the India. It has found in a survey that 80% of losses are caused due to fire.
This project of a system fire was detected early stages. It was tracking and
alarming for protection of trees against forest fire. Now IOT (Internet of
things) devices and cloud based to forest fire alerting system. If cloud can used
to storing the information of data to monitoring the different environmental
variables such as temperature, smoke, moisture of the forest. So finally to
prevent the fire to spread over a huge area and precaution the forest.
Keywords: Arduino UNO atmega328p, temperature sensor, smoke sensor, LCD
Display, mobile Wireless communication.

I.
INRODUCTION
Forest fire detection become one such issue. Due to forest fire
has caused serious environmental Problems and devastation
of flora fauna. The current turbulent global economic,
demographic, social and ecologic context, government, local
administrative authorities and commercial companies or
individuals have the importance resources contained in
forest environment. Forest ecosystems are dynamic and
complicated. Disturbance to any part of network affect the
balance of relationship and equally complete scheme either
absolutely or negativity.so global climate change, drought and
different conditions have caused occurrence of wildfire to
extend, once wildfire occur it takes years to naturally recover.
Forest fire is an uncontrolled fire occurring in nature and
man-made. Once fire starts ignited it rapidly spreads all over
area in the forest. The land were forest is burnt it became
impossible to grow vegetation over there. This is because soil
becomes water repelled and accepts no more water. Leading
to reduction of ground water level. Fire causes huge loss of
lives and properties every year. The national crime records
Bureau indicates that there have been of 113972 fatalities due
to fire accidents of the year 2010 to 2014.one of the most
destructive properties of fire is that it spreads exponentially
and with the right medium can spread uncontrollably. This is
why timely detection of fire of fire is necessary for avoiding a
fire hazard. The internet of things is a collection of sensor,
actuators, software, embedded with electronics, connect each
other with cloud. It is an also economic benefits. IOT make
everyday life easier for humans by developing smart devices.

@ IJTSRD

|

Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD30070 |

How to cite this paper: Ajith. S | Chandru.
S | Boopalan. E | Periyathambi. P "Cloud
Based Forest Fire Alert System using IoT"
Published
in
International Journal
of Trend in Scientific
Research
and
Development
(ijtsrd), ISSN: 24566470, Volume-4 |
IJTSRD30070
Issue-2,
February
2020,
pp.650-652,
URL:
www.ijtsrd.com/papers/ijtsrd30070.pdf
Copyright © 2019 by author(s) and
International Journal of Trend in Scientific
Research and Development Journal. This
is an Open Access article distributed
under the terms of
the
Creative
Commons Attribution
License
(CC
BY
4.0)
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by
/4.0)

If increased IOT devices 31% at 8.4 billion in the year 2017.
IOT involves connecting objects beyond the range of standard
device which are used for every day purpose. The Arduino
UNO at mega 328p for open platform for IOT to program
easily and IOT devices also used to interface the embedded
system and application of users. Temperature sensor used to
measure the temperature level, smoke sensor is used find
smoke type of quantities. If cloud to communication the
devices.
II.
PROPOSED SYSTEM
The proposed system is cloud based forest fire alert system
using IOT technology. In the advancing world, it is very
crucial to protect our environment. The fire cause serious
change and disturbance to wildlife and human life. In wild
animals are most affected and die also known for forest fire.
If forest trees also burned to affect atmosphere,
environment. This fire made naturally and man-made. So
this project need to prevent and pre-cautions from forest fire.
In order to achieve the best fire detection result with faster
time to detect the temperature variation. When temperature
sensor used to measure the temperature variation. Smoke
sensor is a device that dense smoke, typically as an indicator
of fire. Arduino at mega 328p used to control and monitor
the activities. Cloud is a storage purpose to use him. Because
each and every second to monitoring the environment
condition data can be stored. IOT Device to interface with
Arduino and cloud.so finally fix the monitoring system done

Volume – 4 | Issue – 2

|

January-February 2020

Page 650

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470
in nearby forest office station. The detail about the system is
connected with a computer system monitored by the officer.

C. BLUETOOTH
The Bluetooth HC-05 is a very cool module which add two
way wirelessly functionally the project. It connect a small
devices like TV, mobile phones. It is easy to use serial port
protocol. Operating frequency band is 2.4 GHZ. Flash
memory size is 8-bit. And operating voltage is 3.3v.

Fig 4. Bluetooth

Fig 1. Block Diagram
III.
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
A. TEMPRATURE SENSOR
Temperature sensor normally used to measure variation of
the temperature in particular area in range. In LM35 is basic
temperature sensor that can be used for experimental
purpose.

D. ARDUINO ATMEGA 328P
Arduino at mega 328p is an open source electronics
platform. The main advantage is easy to use hardware and
software. It has 14 digital input/output. At mega 328p is an
8-bit micro controller based on AVR RISC. So preparing this
microcontroller for flashing the Arduino bootloader.
Operating voltage is 5v and the clock speed is 16MHZ.

Fig 5. Arduino At mega 328p
E. LCD DISPLAY
An LCD is an electronic display. Which uses liquid crystalline
display produces a visible image. The 16*2 LCD Display is
very basic module commonly used for DIYs and circuit.
Which translates the 16 character per 2 such a line. In
advantage is sharpness, brightness, high peak intensity
produces. Operating voltage is 4.7v to 5.3v.

Fig 2. Temperature sensor
In this sensor output voltage value directly linear
propositional to the Degree Celsius (centigrade). The
advantage of this sensor more memory processing and
communication capabilities. Power supply is -2 to 35v and
temperature Range -550 to 1500c.
B. SMOKE SENSOR
Smoke sensor mq-2 is used to detect smoke and flammable
combustible gasses in atmosphere. Good sensitivity to
alcohol in wide range, long life line, low cost. Output is a
reading in analog voltage. The sensor measure of flammable
gas range is 200 to 1000 ppm. Operating voltage 5v.

Fig 6. LCD Display
F. CLOUD
Cloud is a very important big level storage place and
interconnect the computer, mobile phones with internet.
Cloud is mainly used to storage the data and information will
be shared.

Fig 3. Smoke sensor
@ IJTSRD

|

Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD30070 |

Fig 7. Cloud computing
Volume – 4 | Issue – 2

|

January-February 2020

Page 651

International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com eISSN: 2456-6470
If embedded system sends the monitoring data to server
access and maintained. In public cloud use the project to
server to provide the information via internet.
IV.
CONCLUTION
Forest is a very important and grow in many places in around
world. In a forest is piece of land with many trees. Many
animals to live and survive the forest. Forest also used to
prevent soil erosion, climate changes. This paper, a cloud
based forest fire alert system using IOT technology.
Temperature is increased or smoke typically fire indicate to
LCD display. The real time sense a data will send and stored
cloud. Finally information of the different parameter to be
monitor forest officer and nearby forest survival peoples.
REFERENCES
[1] Angelline.R, Adithya.S, Abishek narayanan, “Fire Alarm
System Using IOT”, international journal of innovative
Technology and exploring engineering (IJITEE) volume8, issue-653, April 2019.
[2] Dr.S.praveenchakravarthy, J.Nancy, V.S.Naveen Kumar,
“Forest Fire Detection System”, international journal of
Recent trends in engineering & research (IJRTER)
conference on electronics, information and
communication System (CELCIS’17) special issue,
March-2107.
[3] Harjinder Singh,” Forest Fire Detection Using Wireless
Sensor”, international journal of scientific & engineering
Research, volume 7, issue 7, July-2016.
[4] Kiran kumar.D, Kishore.T, Suresh kumar.V, “Fire
Monitoring System for Fire Detection Using ZigBee and
Gprs System”, IOSR journal of electronics and
communication engineering (IOSR-JECE) volume 12,
issue 1, ver.III (Jan-feb.2017).

@ IJTSRD

|

Unique Paper ID – IJTSRD30070 |

[5] Michel owayjan, George freiha, roger achkar, “Forest
Fire Detection and Alerting System” 17th IEEE
Mediterranean Electro technical conference, Beirut,
Lebanon 13-16 April 2014.
[6] MR. Lalti patil, Miss. Divya chopra, Miss. Prachi jadhav,
“Forest- Fire Surveillance System Based on Wireless
Sensor Network”, international. Journal of engineering
research and applications ISSN: 2248-9622, vol. 6, issue
4, (part-2) April 2016.
[7] Pallavi.C, jamdhade, Ashwini.D. Kawate, shitals
.lachake,” Forest fire detection using optimized solar
powered Wireless sensor networks”, international
journal of advance search in science and engineering,
volume No.07, Issue NO.02, and February 2017.
[8] Sathish kumar.R, vinoth kumar.M, devaraj varatharaj,
“Design and Development of Automatic Fire Detection
Using Sms and Voice Alert System”, international
journal of scientific & engineering Research, volume 7,
issue 5, May-2016.
[9] Sai kumar. P, Sriramya,” IOT Enabled Forest Fire
Detection and Alerting the Authorities “, international
journal Of Recent technology and engineering (IJRTE)
Volume-7, issue-654, April -2019.
[10] Varun kumar. S, P.V yokesh raj, V. Vignesh,
”Implementation Of Wireless Sensor Network And
IOT For Real Time Forest Fire Warning System”,
international journal of engineering and technologyVolume 4 issue 1, Jan- Feb 2018.

Volume – 4 | Issue – 2

|

January-February 2020

Page 652

