Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Madhuca longifolia: only cause of forest fire ?
Vandana Sharma 1, Sanath Kumar N 2, 3, Rakhee Dimri4, Sanjeet Kumar5 and Ram Babu6
1

Department of Biological Science and Life Sciences, IES University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India
2
Office of the Divisional Forest Officer, Bonaigarh, Sundargarh, Odisha, India
3
School of Applied Sciences, Centurion University of Technology & Management, Khurda, Odisha, India
4
Department of Botany, VSKC Government PG College, Dakpathar, Dehradun, Uttrakahand, India
5
Biodiversity and Conservation Lab, Ambika Prasad Research Foundation, Odisha, India
6
Department of Botany, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
Email Id: sanjeetaprf@gmail.com
DOI:

ABSTRACT
Forest fire is one of the burning issue throughout the world. It creates lot of negative impacts on
biodiversity. There are number of causes of forest fires as per landscapes. Among the observed causes,
collection of Mahua flowers (Madhuca longifolia ) is very common and a major cause of forest fire.
Madhuca longifolia is also known for its food, medicinal, ecological and socio-cultural values. Keeping
the importance and as a causing factor of forest fire, an attempt has been made to do field survey works
to collect the field information on Madhuca longifolia from selected areas of Odisha state, India. The
results revealed that even Madhuca longifolia is an important tree species, it is responsible for the forest
fire. The chapter brings attention towards the need of a strategy to reduce forest fire and maximum
utilization of its plant parts for sustainable development and biodiversity conservation.
Keywords: Forest fire, country liquor, food value, medicinal value, economic value, ecological values
INTRODUCTION
Forest fire is oldest practices and it also happens naturally. Whenever, it happens in large scale, it create
lot of visible negative impacts on forest, wildlife and communities. Usually, it happens in the months of
February to May, but can also depends on landscapes and weather conditions. After fire, forest loses
timber, wildlife (insects, reptiles, mammals etc) along with small birds and pollinators. At the same time,
forest fire contribute to increase global warming and air pollution. There are two types of forest fire is
noticed, natural and manmade fires. Natural fire is caused by lightning, rolling, friction of dry bamboos
etc. Manmade or anthropogenic fire is mainly due to the cigarettes smoking, camping, shifting
cultivation, clearing of dry leaves in the forest and collection of NTFP (Non-timber Forest Produces).
Forest fires are categories into three types- surface fire, crown fire and ground fire (Kumar et al. 2019).
In day time, the fire is uncontrollable than in night time. In day time, the fire is more due to high
temperature and in night, the fire is less due to the low temperature. There are numbers of causes of
manmade forest fire. Among them, collection of Mahua ( Madhuca longifolia ) flowers is common. It is
an deciduous tree belongs to the family Sapotaceae. Leaves are clustered at the end of the branches and
elliptic. Flower is yellow in color, near the ends of the branches in cluster. Corolla yellowish–white, tube
fleshy (Plate 1). Fruit berries like, ovoid, green (Gopalkrishnan and Shimpi 2012). Flowering during
March-April and fruiting during April-May. On the month of March-April, the leaves are dried and start
to shed. Keeping the importance of this tree, an attempt has been made to field works during the forest
fire and to find out the relationship between Mahua and forest fire in selected districts of Odisha along
with to gather the other importance from field and literature. The chapter highlights the importance of
Madhuca longifolia and bring attention towards the making strategy on forest fire mitigation along with
sustainable utilization.

Sharma et al. (2022)

26

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Plate 1: Plant parts of Madhuca longifolia , a) Whole plant, b) Leaves, c) Bark, d) Flowers
METHODOLOGY
The survey was carried out in the month of February–April 2022 in selected districts (Sundargarh &
Mayurbhanj) of Odisha. Local communities were interviewed and information was collected on Forest
fire & Mahua tree. Literature survey also carried out to gather the information on food and medicinal
values of Madhuca longifolia . The selected tree species was identified using available literature (Haines
1925; Saxena and Brahman 1995).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The field survey revealed that among the causes of forest fire, collection of Mahua flowers is major in
study areas. The flowers are collected by tribal communities after setting fire under the Mahua tree. The
ideology behind this practices is, 1) Insects will be killed, 2) The area under Mahua tree will be cleaned.
For easy collection of flowers, local communities make fire and this fire slowly-slowly reach near forest
lead to fire. This events were observed many times during field works. The details are illustrated using
the field photographs in Plate 2. A women making fire to remove the dry leaves for the collection of
Mahua flowers (Plate 2). It was observed that, the awareness programs on forest fire by the Forest
Department is playing a vital role in preventing forest fire. After the lot of awareness programs, local
communities set controlled fire under Mahua tree and they are also cleaning using the blower with field
staffs. It was noticed that, whole family members are engaged to collect the flowers in flowering period.
After collection from the field, they bring them to the house for complete drying under sunlight. In
details are illustrated in Plate 3. After collection, they spread on clothes or mates for drying. It was
noticed that, for drying, it takes about 1 week (Plate 4). It was observed that after drying, the flowers are
stored or used to sell in the local markets (Plate 5).
Sharma et al. (2022)

27

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Plate 2: Tribal women collect the flowers of Madhuca longifolia a) Burning of dry leaves, b) Sweeping
the dry leaves in one place, c) Watching over the fire to prevent forest fire

Plate 3: Local communities collecting flower from forest fringe

Sharma et al. (2022)

28

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Plate 4: Drying of Madhuca longifolia under the sunlight

Plate 5: Flower of Madhuca longifolia in market

Sharma et al. (2022)

29

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

The dried flowers are used to make country liquor. They prepare country liquor in traditional ways
during festivals and rituals. It was noticed that they use some natural fermenting agent for fermentation.
The residue is used as a fodder of domestic pigs. For distillation, sometimes they use perennial water
source and inside forest they prepare the mahua traditional liquor. Details are illustrated in Plate 6.

Plate 6: Illustration on preparation of liquor
Sharma et al. (2022)

30

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Ecological values of Madhuca longifolia : Apart from a major cause of forest fire, it also holds another
important feature as it is a host plant to many orchid species like Vanda species, Luisia species, Acampe
species, Oberonia species etc. Plate 7 shows that, it is the host of many epiphytic orchid species which
play important role in ecological balance and conservation of Orchid species.

Plate 7: Orchid species on Madhuca longifolia a) Many orchid species on Madhuca longifolia, b-d)
Orchid species
Food values of Madhuca longifolia : It was observed that mahua flower is used for sweetening in halwa,
making laddu (a type of sweet) and cooked with vegetables. Seed oil is also used for cooking purposes
(Sinha et al. 2017).
Medicinal values of Madhuca longifolia : It is noticed that the plant parts of Madhuca longifolia is used
in divers diseases and disorders. The flower possesses antibacterial and anthelmintic activity.
Medicinally the flower is used for cooling agent, skin diseases, anthelmintic. The seed possess antiinflammatory and antiulcer activity (Sunita and Sarojini 2013). Bark is used to treat diabetes, bronchitis,
headache, piles and ulcer (Jha and Mazumder 2018; Mishra and Poonia 2019). The fruit is used to treat
tonsillitis. Leaves is used to treat eczema, wound healing, anti-burns (Saif et al. 2020). The metal nanoparticles synthesis with plant part extracts of Madhuca longifolia is able to inhibit the growth of gram
negative pathogenic bacteria and able to restore the renal function along with prevent cellular damages.
The plant parts also possess different types of bioactive compounds like phenolic compounds, ketones,
aldehydes, quercetin etc (Annalakshmi et al. 2013; Das et al. 2018; Patil et al. 2018; Peter and Prince
2018).
Sharma et al. (2022)

31

Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Advancement in Medicinal Pants Research, ISBN: 978-81-955847-2-7

Economic values of Madhuca longifolia : During the survey, it was observed that fresh and dried flowers
are used to sell in the local markets. The seed oil is also used to sell.
CONCLUSION
The present study concluded that collection of flowers of Madhuca longifolia is a major cause of forest
fire in study areas. The plant parts of Madhuca longifolia is used as a food and having medicinal values.
The flowers create livelihood to the local communities. Therefore, the study indicates that need a
strategy for the collection of flowers without making fire along with proper value addition.
REFERENCES
Annalakshmi R, Mahalakshmi S, Charles A and Sahayam CS. (2013). GCeMS and HPTLC analysis of leaf extract
of Madhuca logifolia (Koenig) Linn. Drug Invention Today. 76-80.
Das P, Ghosh S, Ghosh R, Dam S and Baskey M. (2018). Madhuca longifolia plant mediated green synthesis of
cupric oxide nanoparticles: A promising environmentally sustainable material for waste water treatment
and efficient antibacterial agent. Journal of Photochemistry & Photobiology, B: Biology. 189: 66-73.
Gopalkrishan B and Shimpi SN. (2012). Pharmacognostical studies on stem bark of Madhuca longifolia (Koen.)
Macbr. var. latifolia (Roxb.) A. Cheval. Indian Journal of Natural Products and Resources. 3(2): 232-236.
Haines HH. (1994). The Botany of Bihar and Orissa. Adlard & Sons, London. 1994
Jha D and Mazumder PM. (2018). Biological, chemical and pharmacological aspects of Madhuca longifolia. Asian
Pac J Trop Med. 11:9-14.
Kumar S, Chaudhary A, Biswas T, Ghosh S. (2019) Technical information series. Identification of fire prone
forest areas based on GIS analysis of achieved forest fire points detected in last thirteen years. Forest
Survey of India. 1(1): 15.
Mishra A and Poonia A. (2019). Mahua (Madhuca longifolia) flowers: review on processing and biological
properties. Nutrition and food science. 49(6): 1153-1163.
Patil MP, Singh RD, Koli PB, Patil KT, Jagdale BS, Tipare AR and Kim GD. (2018). Antibacterial potential of
silver nanoparticles synthesized using Madhuca longifolia flower extract as a green resource. Microbial
Pathogenesis. 121: 184-189.
Peter JS and Prince SE. (2018). Diclofenac-induced renal toxicity in female Wistar albino rats is protected by the
pre-treatment of aqueous leaves extract of Madhuca longifolia through suppression of inflammation,
oxidative stress and cytokine formation. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy. 98: 45-51.
Saif M, Varma R, Kant R, Gupta RK. (2020). Madhuca longifolia (Mahua): A comprehensive ethno
pharmacological review. 8(2):172-175.
Saxena HO and Brahmam M. (1995). The Flora of Orissa. Orissa Forest Development Corporation & RRL,
Bhubaneswar.
Sinha J, Singh V, Singh J, Rai Ak. (2017). Phytochemistry, ethnomedical uses and future prospects of Mahua
(Madhuca longifolia) as a food: A review. Journal of Nutrition and Food Sciences. 7:573.
Sunita M and Sarojini P. (2013). Madhuca longifolia (Sapotaceae): A review of its traditional uses and nutritional
properties. International Journal of Humanities and Social Invention. 2(5): 30-36.

Sharma et al. (2022)

32

